+++
date = 2025-11-04
authors = ["Josh Fairhead"]
title = "Process Thought and Science 2025 (Session 5)"
description = "Beyond Materialism"
draft = true
[taxonomies]
tags = ["Process Philosophy", "Whitehead", "Bennett"]
[extra]
banner = "session-5-thumbnail.jpg"
banner_style = "object-position: center center;"
styles = ["lightbox.css"]
scripts = ["travel-lightbox.js"]

+++

Session five is about moving beyond materialism, consequentially it encapsulates two core parts; a conversation with Ed Kelly (University of Virginia) in relation to Perseptual Studies, particularly centered around phenemena like Psi, and a video lecture by Matt covering Schelling and his contemporaries. 

While the ordering was as presented, it seems in keeping with the spirit of the lecture to reverse it and discuss the recording first before the conversation with Ed Kelly. By this I'm gesturing towards the key theme of Schelling inverting Kant or Fichtes perspectives to arrive at his own counterpoint. 

To get to Schelling or Whitehead, Matt takes us on a historical excursion with regard to Panenthesic thinking - which is somewhat the idea of god interpenetrating the universe, yet also trancending it or being greater than it - because he percieves Schelling to be amongst the first Evolutionary Panentheists. The idea of an evolutionary process or time deleopmental universe beginning aroud this period with Schelling, Herder and Lessing. 

But to understand Schelling, and what was creative about his thinking or even Whiteheads, Matt claims that you need to understand Kants copernicaian revolution - despite Whiteheads claims to being a recursion to pre-Kantian modes of thought, who he references none the less, and ends up inverting in an interesting way, possibly prefigured by Schelling. 

It's made clear that Whitehead probably wasn't reading a whole bunch of Schelling, but he is cited a number of times in the concept of nature. It's also suggested that Whitehead possibly got German Idealism wrong or misunderstood it, as he claims it was out of touch with modern science. You might say this about some but not Goeth and Schelling who actually contributed to scientific development, later influencing Horsted and Faraday, who developed theories of electromagnetism and were influenced by Schellings understanding of polarities in the natural world. 

## Kant

Going back to Kant, in his critique of pure reason, he is known to have said that "I had to deny knowledge in order to make room for faith"; in other words that to know true reality one has to put aside materialistic science. However, Matt suggests that there is this 'Kantian moment' (or perhaps occasion), where Kant realises that, despite his interest in evaluating Swedenborg's Clairvoyance, Precognition, and other immaterial Psi phenemena, that such claims of disembodied entities persisting in space and time, required him to articulate a new approach towards understanding natural phenemena - one that would rule out and exclude what Newtonian Physics couldn't account for. 

This is possibly the issue that Whitehead had with Kantian thought, or where he thought it "took a wrong turn" as Matt puts it. In my opinion it's not so much that it's wrong to distinguish between the phenomenal and noumenal realms, but seen as disjoint and seperate there are clearly going to be issues with an excluded middle. This is perhaps why Matt feels this moment to be so influential; the disjunction enabling and perhaps even leading scientific thought to over optimise on the materialistic or phenemenolgical world view, while relegating the noumenal realms to second class citizens. It may be my interpretation of the lecture, but if it is Hume that woke Kant from his dogmatic slumber, it seems pretty odd that he would then double down on such a "Spiritual Disjunction"...

In an attempte to clarify this, I put out a message to Matt here: https://substack.com/@joshafairhead/note/c-175816408?r=6e5ypt&utm_source=notes-share-action&utm_medium=web

So within the Critique of Pure Reason, he's asking the question of what our mind must be like or how must our cognitition to be structured for nature to appear to us in a lawfully ordered way? As a student of Newtons physics, and having done some astronomy himself while developing a "Universal Theory of the Heavens" in which the "Kant/Laplace Nubular Hypotheses" is developed, they imagine how our solarsystem might be formed through gravitation alone. The Newtonian background perhaps illustrates the assumptions behind the question, which implies a seperation that doesnt so much hold water in [todays sciences](https://youtu.be/F5awllN5W4w?si=58vHltym4BF4kjdu). Despite being enamoured with Newtonian physics, he realised that if they were true of all of nature and the human being, at least in our embodied physical form as a part of nature, then there wes no room left for freedom, just mechanistic causal force.

Since Kant wanted to be able to justify this "efficient" causal understanding, while leaving room for human freedom, he ends up in a compromised position. Matt apparently calls this the human interval because of it's instability, where we are asked to live in two worlds; the moral world, and the material. The reasoning provided is that for human life, morality, civilisation etc. to be meaningful - we have to assume we are free. Meanwhile the this moral world is completely invisible to the world of first order science, as it can't be observed or measured. Kant apparently allows these to hang together by saying that natural science studies the apparent worl and religion deals with the world of noumena which we cant know anything about but are justified in believing that it exists; "I had to limit knowledge to leave room for faith".

While this is a useful distinction, based on the given explination, I don't understand how these worlds 'hang together' in this way. It seems as though Kant has made two neat piles and like Aristotle and excluded the middle where never the twain shall meet. I'm not sure if this is actually his position, so following up with Matt about this, he suggests that "our capacity for reason depends on our freedom". This may or may not be Kants view, but it aligns well with Bennetts cosmology where Hazard permits Freedom through choice (reason) in the face of uncertainty - which in turn gives rise to morality. If this is Kants perspective, it would explain why he was satisfied with his position and why absolutely nobody understood it when he originally publishect the Critique. 

According to Matt, it took about a generation before he became all the rage and wrote two more critiques; the critique of practical reason, where he takes freedom as a postulate and unpacks his moral theory, and the critique of judgement which deals with aesthetics, our percetption of beauty and also deals with organisms while exploring teleological judgement around purpositiveness. 

(/TriadOfKantsBooks.jpeg)

Apparently, Kant would say that there is a form of teleology in artistic expression because the artist has an end in mind, which they try to express in their artwork. He saw this teleology in the living world, and realised that there is a crack in the disjunction between the firewall he had errected between the noumenal world and the phenemonal world, which was the organism. The laws which apply to sub-animate existence do not apply to organism, which is where he coins the term "self organisation" due to their cause and effect being circular, rather than the "efficient cause" of Newtonian Physics. 

(/TetradOfAristotlenCauses)

In other words, he was seeing organisms are purposive - as if Kant had said that even when we look at even a mere blade of grass, the freedom and self organisation of our own rational capacities, our own autonomy as free beings, are reflected back to us as if in a mirror. He was seeing reason, which is supposed to be only in the human mind, in the living world operating in this looping form of causality. Where Kant goes with this realisation is to say that biology can't be a science because its not mechanistic, and when we see self-organisation in the living world what we are doing is projecting our own rational capacities and freedom on to that. Resultantly, Kant believed that biology could only ever be a descriptive science, unlike physics which is explanitory. 

Hearing Matts account of Kant, I'm greatful for the summary of his thinking process and the historical overivew. However, it does very much remind me of the Gurdjieff aphorism that 'Man is third force blind' because it seems ther is quite a lot of polar thinking and laboroious amounts of thinking required to trancend it; namely things like the recognition that life/organism unites the material/phenomenal and the spiritual/noumenal elements of existence. These essentially say the same thing:

(/TridadOfKantsReason)
(/TriadOfAstropoiesis)

What is interesting here is that this seems like the schismogenesis of a kind of Spiritual Disjuncture in the sciences, when perhaps whats really needed is a real trancendental philosophy or more adequitly science that deals with the hypernomic/noumenal realm? Spiritual, or maybe second order science, dealing with trancendental wholes, somewhat along the lines of Sheldrakes morphogenetic fields? 


## Fichte (Post Kantian philosophy)

Moving beyond Kant, Matt outlines that in the wake of Kants critiques - in his so called trancendental philosophy - there were a number of responses, with the first coming from Johann Gottlieb Fichte who wanted to further radicalise Kants work. Initially he quite liked what Fichte was doing, but for Fichte, it there was a residue of dogmatism in Kants philosophy. This is illustrated by saying theres a point in the Critique of Pure Reason where Kant says "I'm not a kind of darkly idealist who thinks theres not a real world out there". In other words that noumenal word which he burried and marks with an X, definately exists and we can think about it, we just cant know anything about it, yet he goes as far as to say that it is the cause of our sensations, sensitive experience and so on. 

I'm not entirely sure how this is dogmatic, it seems quite open minded to hold place for the noumenal, while also dealing with the phenemonal. It may be that the dogmatism was Kant saying that we can't know the noumenal when such a world is really "closer than your jugular vein". To me this hinges on what is meant by, or specifically the methodology of knowing, which may be defined in several ways but is typically understood as what Bennett termed as "discriminitory knowledge" - which would be utterly inadequite for a second order - or noumenal - science that requires observer participation. Based on my interaction with Matt, it sounds like Kant implies this distinction in his way of knowing (or at least Matt does) but he doesn't seem to articulate precicely enough to be correctly understood unlike Bennett. 

(/HeptadOfKnowledge.jpg)

However there is a big problem with the Noumenal; Kant has already spent hundreds of pages elaborating that causation is a category of our own understanding, only to now contradict this by saying that the world beyond our experience is causing experience. In other words what was previously an immanant metaphysics (where cause is just a category of our understanding), was now becoming a trancendental metaphysics (where cause comes from a place beyond our knowledge), Fichte sees this and radicalises the perspective by creating an omnicient metaphysics where phenomenal and noumenal worlds are brought forth by our own minds and thinking activity. 

Matt suggests that this may sound like solopsism, but feels it an unfair characterisation of Fichte, who when talking about the "I" - the a first person pronoun - he is talking about something thats present beyond each of us, that our emperical ego or everyday consciousness presupposes. An "I" that neither you nor me posess, an "I" that trancends us from which the whole universe pours out of, that is apparently not that different from an Advita position, which he would have been influenced by throught the Schlegel brothers who were part of his circle of friends in Gaiena, who were translating the Sanskrit epics Bhagavad Gita and Ramayana. Matt suggests this influence of asian philosophy and spirituality makes it unsuprising that Fichte would go in this direction.

(/BehindOurEyes.jpg)

Based on Matts explanations, its possible I'm misinterpreting the stance of these philosophers as I've not read their words directly, and form the descriptions it sounds like there is a mixture of influences present such that trancendental philosophy is not 'pure trancendence', in the same way the Fichtes more omnicient philosophy has elements of trancendence in it, namely that while essentially sounding like a philosophy of mind, he is still attempting to make claims about 'the absolute' or 'all' which is a trancendental move. It would probably be quite hard for any philosophy to be purely immanant, omnicient or trancendental, because there is bound to be a degree of epistemic trespassing unless very tightly scoped to the appropriate domain, but instead it's interesting to note the dynamic interplays between these domians which give rise to a particular brew. For example Fichtes work appears to be a 2-1-3 "Concentration" pattern in the language of [Cosmic Ecology](http://cosmicecology.org/page33.html), where "A receptive impulse (omnicient) moderated by a an affirmative state (trancendental) focuses the scope of reconciliation (immanant) increasing concentrative power." where the essence of German idealism was refined. This is however admittedly a somewhat speculative take from 30,000ft using analytical tools beyond the time in question. 

(/TriadOfLandriesMetaphysics.jpg)

## Schelling

Schelling appears on the scene in the late 1790s, initially as a student of Fichtes publishing articles in response to his work aged ninteen, initially impressed by Fichtes efforts to radicalise Kant, making Kant even more 'trancendental' than even Kant realised (Matts word choice, not mine this is possibly better framed as 'omniscient'). This they called the spirit of Kant, though the letter was more conservative, and the claim somewhat debatable - especially as Kant apparently lived to see what they were doing and got uncomfortable with it (though admittedly his own perspectives seemed to change over time). 

Schelling, having grown up in the context of Swabian Pietism, was relatively at home with mysticism that made connections between nature and the spiritual with heartfelt faith, but Fichte was so intensly emphasising the mind pole (omnicient) that Schelling too became uncomfortable, feeling that nature was not being done justice towards in Fichtes approach in which nature was just the "not-I". From Fichtes perspective, nature is something posited by the "I" through its activity, so that the I can reflect upon itself and meet some resistance in order to become self conscious. In this sense it would seem that nature is naught but a mirror with no autonomous independent reality of its own, so a mere apperance and even more than Kant had it in his 'trancendental' philosophy (again it sounds like its more of an omniscient philosophy, that births a space for the trancendental by 'negating the negative' as Hagel would say)

(/TriadOfKantsReason.jpg)

Schelling does not like Fichtes result, because in his view it is the wrong conclusion - nature is autonomous and has its own independent reality - not a mere appearence or mirage, and realises that he can invert Kants logic to justify it as the body of the divine and a revelation of the deity. This is an interesting move because it perhaps indicates the kind of scientist Schelling was; from a first order perspective this might be considered analogous to fiddling with an experiment to change the results, but from a second order or relational perspective he's making use of the relational dynamics inherent in the triad. At this point its interesting because by inverting the logic, hes actually elaborating the trancendental aspects of Kants work that he said we can think about, but claimed unknowable. 

In other words Schelling appropriated Kants basic question of **what must the mind be so that nature can appear to it in the way it does?**, and said no, it is not mind and its categories and forms of intutition that are apriori (omnisient), its nature that is apriori, changing the frame to **what must nature be such that mind can emerge out of it?**. This is what the author Robert Piersig would call a "Copernican Inversion", the moment that nothing changed but everything changed as Copernicus says the earth revolves around the sun, not the sun around the earth. 

(/CopernicanInversion.jpg)

This inversion of Kants core question is what leads Schelling into becoming one of the first evolutionary Panenthiasts; hes not an emergentist that thinks nature is subjective from the start, but develops mind out of this long evolutionary process that leasd to the human being, in this way hes quite anthropocentric. This is in contrast to the likes of Bennett, Margolis, Lovelock or Watts - who all see 'nature' as beyond human intelligence. Watts describes this eloquently as a planet that peoples in the same way that apple trees apple. Bennet would go one meta on all three of these and go to stars, galaxies and the unfathomnable totality, but lets stick to Schelling for now. 

For him, rather than mind being apriori for the conditions of our experience, Schelling says nature is apriori and develops an evolutionary account that nature goes through to arrive at mind. Apparently he famoustly said that natuer is visible spirit, and that mind or our consciousness is invisible nature. So his philosophy of 'trancendental realism' where humans, nature and perhaps the universe becomes ever more conscious of themselves was quite radical for its time. It's not that nature lacks spirit, it's that nature is unaware of its latent spiritual capacities and gradually becomes more aware of itself through ever more complex entities where humans are almost transitional state. It's interesting how semantics of the word nature is interpreted by these authors, as it would seem that for Schelling it translates as an emergent or perhaps even trancendental whole in which we are encapsulated as a unified totalitiy, while for the other authors mentioned the word nature seems to means a collection of stuff 'out there' lacking unification. 

So Schellings innovation is this question of "**what must nature be such that mind can emerge out of it?**", where he begins without pretense that nature can be understood outside of his own conscious experience, which is still nature, just at a later stage of development. Paradoxically he starts at the tail end of the question, starting with mind (like Kant), to answer a question with a different set of assumptions. Boiling our own self conscious experience to its most basic potencies he apparently suggests that nature begins with this basic form of subjectivity, which for him actually needs to be polarised. This basic subjectivity seems ephemearal without a comparative touch point or schema, which I'd suggest as Bennetts 12 energies; so for me at least this basic form of subjectivity is probably 'dispersive' or 'zero point' energy, which gets polarized as 'directed/patterning' energy. 

(/12Energies.jpg)





So he begins with a picture of nature where you could almost say that hes not pretending he can understand how nature began outside of his own conscious experience, now at a later stage of his development. 

But I read his method as basically alchemically distilling down our own self conscious experience to its most basic potencies, and saying that nature begins with this basic form of this subjectivity, which for him actually needs to be polarised. He says everything begins with gravity and light, where light is the expansive force that wants to expand into infinity, and gravity is this contracting force that wants to hide away and shrink into nothing. These forces never exist apart from eachother but are constantly struggling with eachother, so he describes through a series of stages how these two infinite forces try to meet and defeat eachother, and arrive at a series of temporary equilibria that continue to spill over and become more complex. So he describes a movement from light and gravity, through magnetism and electricity, through chemistry to biology and on to human consciousness and self consciousness. Where evolution proceeds, searching for equilibirum that it can never find, and he thinks that by moving up this series of stages theres an approximation to equilibrium reached, in say chemistry that wasnt there in electricity and magnetism, and then in organism there is this kind equalibrium where theres a sort of circular causality, where an organism has to maintain itself far from equilibrium but non the less maintain our form. So theres a kind of temporary stability thats preceeded by this homeostasis, homeorecess is probably a better account to keep things in motion. 

so he has this evolutionary account where this process of complexification is not simply a random accident but a self revelation of god, this is evolutionary panenthism, theres a term in german Gheisliblicheit, which means a spiritual embodyment, which is kind of an incarnational account that schelling is giving here, where the tangible spatiotemporal world is not maya but the divine is seeking to become more perfect and complete, throught the process of incarnation. so i think the picture that schelling is suggesting to us is one where rather than thinking of an actual world of space time as, the top part of the iceberg and the quantumn world below it. He would want us to think more in termms as always a mixture of the two, and while we could get confused and think of everything as the spacetime model, what shelling is saying is not that there is this 3D container of physical bodies, and this realm of possibilities. He talkso of potencies and talks of possibilities but he wants us to inhabit one world, where both of these elements are constantly interpenetrating, and where rather than thinking of the tangible physical world as maya, even if its not the purely illusory form but the playful manifestation, this is actually quite serious for schelling, this is the divine trying to enter into ever deeper relationships with itself. So the physical world the embodied world of physical organisms and self conscious lining organisms like us, is really gods purpose that that unfolds. its not just maya. This geisliblicheit idea that schellings inhereting from some of the swavian piestic mystics that he grew up with, is a significant, maybe it exists in some tension with some of the other aisian traditions that weve heard about today.













---
Kant starts with interest in everything, creates a partition between phenenomena and noumena, says phenemona is requirese freedom so has a dependency on noumena, then establishes a connection through organisms. 

---
This lecture is a conversation with Ed Kelly as a guest, coming from university of virginia, department of perceptual studies. The discussion focuses on non-local or immaterial phenemena like 'Psi', which honestly seemed better addressed in documentaires like the Telepahty Tapes, and while such miraculous phenemena are very much my area of interest I found this conversation a bit fragmented and a yawn.  

In terms of Whitehead they cover old ground of actual entities as having a physical and mental dipole, and that this is held together through prehension. I suppose when you get into non-locality and psi, prehension is a pretty good term. The most salient aspect of the discussion for me was the mention of 'eternal objects' and 'potenti', the former being along the lines of platonic forms, the latter being less platonic, so probably closer to Wolframs hypergraphs or something like that.

A lecture by Matt is presented after this conversation which...

---


@Matt Seigel - have you read Forrest Landrys Immanant metaphysics? I wonder if his language is useful to characterise the dynamics of German idealism. Neither Kant nor Fichte sound 'trancendental', with Fichte emphasising the 'mind pole' as you put it would sound more like an 'omniscient' modality to me, while Kant also sounds like he went in that direction direction when he put aside the noumenal realm (which sounds of trancendental flavour). Schelling then sounds like he integrated this as an evoloutionary panenthiast which then sounds more Immanant. Landrys triadic model, seems to be the most useful frame to make sense of this lecture, what do you think? 




---

Matt on Schelling instead of Whitehead, I think of Schelling as one of the first Panethesiests, but this idea of an evolutionary process or time developmental universe seems to be rather new with Schelling before maybe Herder or Lessing, who were just beginning to think of an evolutionary universe. Panenthesism preceeded Schelling, but he was probably one of the first to ealiests exemplars of evolutionary panenthesim. 

To understand schelling you have to start with Kants copernician revolution. This will help us undersand what was so creative about what schelling was doing, and its important to understand what whitehead was doing - even though Whitehead in the preface to process and reality said it was a recursion to pre kantian modes thought, because he thought there were major wrong turns with Kant, none the less he goes on to refer to kant a bunch and ends up inverting kant in an interesting way that i think was prefigured by schelling. 

I dont thkink that whitehead was reading a bunch of schelling but he cites him once in the concept of nature. One last thing Ill say about whitehead right now, is that in science of the modern world I think he gets german idealism wrong, because he says that its unfortunate that as generative as it was philosophically it was out of touch with modern science. Which you cant say about schelling or goethe, they were deeply immersed in the cutting edge sciences of their time; the study of electricity and magnetism, biology embryology. Not only were they studying what science was discovering but schelling and goethe contributed to science. The german physisist Horstead in developing electromagnetism and faraday later were influenced by schellings understandnig of the polarities at work in the natural world. SO whitehead got his history a little wrong here.

Lets go back to Kant, in his critique of pure reason 1871 he says in the introduction to limit our knowledge of nature to leave room for faith. Theres this kantian moment, which has continued to be so influential for hundreds of years afterwards that I think has a lot to do with the problems of psi research being put on oneside and not being considered to be part of our study of nature and natural phenemenoa, because kant was actually very interested in swinborg, and his claims towards clairvoyence, precognition and all these things and kant wanted to evaluate all that. it was one of the triggers in addition to David Hume that awoke him from his dogmatic slumber and it was also swinbogrs claims about disembodied entities still seeming to have bodies and exist in space and time that made kant realise he needed to put all that aside and elaborate a new approach to understanding natural phenemnoa that would rule out things that newtonian physics couldnt account for. while at the same time for Kant there was this other realm, this noumenal realm where we were at least justified in believing in the afterlife, freedom and so on.

But what kant does in his critique of pure reason is to ask, what must our mind be like or our cognition be structured for nature to appear to us in a lowfully ordered way. And so he was a student of newtons physics, did a bit of astromy himself, where had this universal theory of the heavens, where he developes the kant laplace nebular hypothesis, because kant was the first one to imagine how our solarsystem formed by gravitation alone, so the plasma physisists might have some issues. But none the less he was enamoured with newtonian physics but he realised that if this was true of all of nature and the human being, at least in our embodied physical form, as part of nature then theres no room left for our freedom - so Kant wanted to be able to justify this efficient causal understanding of nature but also wanted to leave room for our human freedom. So he ends up with this compromised position, sometimes I call this the human interval because its unstable, so kants asking us to live in these two worlds. The moral world order on the onehand where he says for look for human life to be meaningful, civilisation and morality to be meaningful, we have to assume we are free. The moral world is totally invisable to science, we cant observe it or measure it but we assume it because we are free beings, if we wernt all of morality goes out the window. On the otherhand we have natural science which gives us a pciture of the universe bane seemingly deterministic mechanical laws, and the way he allows these to hang together is by saying that well natural science is studying the apparent world, the world of phenemena, and what religion has been dealing wit his this invisible world this noumenal world, we cant know anything about this world but we are justified in beliieving it exists. I had to limit knowledge to leave room for faith and freedom primarily.

Kant seemed pretty satisfied with this position, absolutely nobody understood it when he published the critique of pure reason. It took about a generation but he was all the rage and wrote two more critiques, the critique of practical reason (freedom as a postualate where he unpacks his moral theory), 1790 the critique of judgement where hes dealing with aesthetics and our perception of beauty, and hes also dealing with organisms and exploring teleological judgement, judgement- of purpositiveness. He would sat there is a form of teleology at work in human artistic expression. The artist has an end in mind and try to express that in their artworks. He saw this teleology in the living world, and relaised there is a crack in the firewall hed errected in the noumenal world of freedom on onehand and the phenemonal world of nature obeying mechanical laws on the other, and that crakc is the organism. Kant realisted that the mechanical laws which apply in everyting else in nature dont apply to organisms, and coins the term self organisation because their cause and effect are circular, this isnt efficient cause anymore like newtonian physics. Organisms are purposive, as if kant said that when we look at even a mere blade of grass the freedom and self organisation of our own rational capacities, our own autonomy as free beings reflected back to us as if in a mirror. So he was seeing reason, which is supposed to be in the human mind, in the living world operationg in this loopy form of causality. 

Where kant goes with this realisation is to say that biology cant be a science because its not mechanistic, and when we see self organisation in the living world what we are doing is projecting our own rational capacities and freedom on to that. We can use that as a heuristic, as if organisms had this other form of causality that made them agents in their own right, just like we are moral agents but thats not what nature is really doing or at least we cant know if thats what nature is really doing. As a result of this biology can only ever be a descriptive science, unlike physics which can explanitory. Even though for kant physics is only explaing the phenemenol world, theres also a noominal world for kant where god, immortality and freedom and so on could exist and we are justified in believing this because in principal science just cant reach this world. The kantian interval.

Most human beings want there to be some connection between spiritual reality and their everyday lives, and want to be able to do science of, well biology first of all. But also psychology, understand our own psyches, things like the afterlife, all of this psi phenemena that kant just coordined off in this uncomfortable realm. 

In the wake of kants critiques, in his so called trancendental philosophy, there are a number of responses, the first came from, yoan gotlard Fichte, who wanted to further radicalise kant and kant initially quite liked what Fichte was doing, but for Fichte, kant left a residue of dogmatism in his philosophy, where theres a point in the critique of pure reason where kant says I'm not a kinda a kinda darkly idealist who thinks theres not a real world out there. That noumenal word which he marks with an X definately exists and we can think it, we just cant know anything about it. And he even goes as far as to say that the noumenal world is the cause of our sensations, sensitive experience. 

The problem with that is that kant had already said and spent hundreds of pages elaborating that causation is a category of our own understanding, but now hes saying that that the world beyond our experience is causing our experience. So hes applying a category beyond apperences in order to account for experiences, which Fichte sees and then radicalises by saying that the whole world, phemenal noumenal is brought forth by our own minds and thinking activity. This might sound like solopsism but I dont think this is a fair characterisation of Fichte. When he talks about the I, the first preson pronoun, he talks of something thats present beyond each of us that our emperical ego or everyday consciousness presupposes or that I dont have anymore than you posess this trancendental I that Fichte was talking about, that the whole universe pours out of. Its not that different from a Advita position and indeed these guys were the Slagel brothers, who were part of this circle of friends in Gaiena who were translating the agada gad vida, so there was this influx of asian philosophy and spirituality, so its no suprise that Fichte would go in this direction.

Schelling now, he was a student of Fichtes in the late 1790s, where at 19/20 years old he started publishing articles in response to Fichte, and initially was quite impressed by what Fichte was doing to further radicalise kant, to make kant even more trancendental than even kant realised. As they put then, look we are following the spirit of kant even though the letter of kant was more conservitive, and kant lived long enough to see what they were doing and got uncompfotable with it. 

But schelling had also grown up in this context, of swabbian pietism, and this mysticism that thought there was tihs connection between nature and the spirity world. And so Fichte was so intensly emphasising the mind pole of this mind nature polarity that schelling became a bit uncomfortable and thought that nature was not being done justice by Fichtes approach, nature was just the not I. Which in Fichtes view, nature is just posited by the I, by the activity of the I so that nature can reflect upon itself and meet some resistance so as to become self conscious. But in that sense nature is nothing more than the opportunity for mind to become conscious of itself, it has no autonomous independent reality for Fichte. Its even more of a mere appearence than kant had it in his trancendental philosophy.

So schelling what he does is that he realises, wait a minuite I need to invert this whole kantian picture that Fichte has radicalises, because if it leads to where Fichte ends up that cant possibly be right because we konw nature is out there and autonomous from schellings point of view, the body of the divine and revelation of the deity. 

If kants basic question is copernician revolution philosophy, which he analogises with what Copernicous did in astrology, where he said its not the sky thats moving its the earth thats moving. Kant did something analogous by saying cognition is not about our mind conforming to the objects out there, for kant its the reverse, objects need to conform to how our minds are structured. So kants asking **what must the mind be so that nature can appear to it in the way it does?**.

Schelling says no no no, we need to reverse this, its not mind and its categories and its forms of intuition that are apriori, schelling says its nature thats apriori. And asks **what must nature be such that mind can emerge out of it?** now hes not an emergentist that thinks that nature is subjective from the very beginning, but only becomes self conscious as a result of this long evolutionary process that leads to the human being. Hes quite anthropocentric but well come back to that. Rather than mind being apriori for the conditions of our experience, Schelling says nature is apriori and develops an evolutionary account that nature goes through to arrive at mind, he would say famously that nature is visible spirit, mind or that our consciousness is invisible nature. So he has this sense in which human beings, nature, the universe become conscious of itself - which in our circles we are so used to hearing, but schelling was one of the first to really work idea out. 

So he begins with a picture of nature where you could almost say that hes not pretending he can understand how nature began outside of his own conscious experience, now at a later stage of his development. But I read his method  as basically alchemically distilling down our own self conscious experience to its most basic potencies, and saying that nature begins with this basic form of this subjectivity, which for him actually needs to be polarised. He says everything begins with gravity and light, where light is the expansive force that wants to expand into infinity, and gravity is this contracting force that wants to hide away and shrink into nothing. These forces never exist apart from eachother but are constantly struggling with eachother, so he describes through a series of stages how these two infinite forces try to meet and defeat eachother, and arrive at a series of temporary equilibria that continue to spill over and become more complex. So he describes a movement from light and gravity, through magnetism and electricity, through chemistry to biology and on to human consciousness and self consciousness. Where evolution proceeds, searching for equilibirum that it can never find, and he thinks that by moving up this series of stages theres an approximation to equilibrium reached, in say chemistry that wasnt there in electricity and magnetism, and then in organism there is this kind equalibrium where theres a sort of circular causality, where an organism has to maintain itself far from equilibrium but non the less maintain our form. So theres a kind of temporary stability thats preceeded by this homeostasis, homeorecess is probably a better account to keep things in motion. 

so he has this evolutionary account where this process of complexification is not simply a random accident but a self revelation of god, this is evolutionary panenthism, theres a term in german Gheisliblicheit, which means a spiritual embodyment, which is kind of an incarnational account that schelling is giving here, where the tangible spatiotemporal world is not maya but the divine is seeking to become more perfect and complete, throught the process of incarnation. so i think the picture that schelling is suggesting to us is one where rather than thinking of an actual world of space time as, the top part of the iceberg and the quantumn world below it. He would want us to think more in termms as always a mixture of the two, and while we could get confused and think of everything as the spacetime model, what shelling is saying is not that there is this 3D container of physical bodies, and this realm of possibilities. He talkso of potencies and talks of possibilities but he wants us to inhabit one world, where both of these elements are constantly interpenetrating, and where rather than thinking of the tangible physical world as maya, even if its not the purely illusory form but the playful manifestation, this is actually quite serious for schelling, this is the divine trying to enter into ever deeper relationships with itself. So the physical world the embodied world of physical organisms and self conscious lining organisms like us, is really gods purpose that that unfolds. its not just maya. This geisliblicheit idea that schellings inhereting from some of the swavian piestic mystics that he grew up with, is a significant, maybe it exists in some tension with some of the other aisian traditions that weve heard about today.





So let me give you a quick tour of schellings publications. 

So he began in the 1790s wiht a few early essays that were responding to Fichte and very much in line vith Fichte thought, doing trancendental philosophy beginning with the I and its activity and then trying to show how the whole world could unfold just from the activit of the I, so in the late 1790s around 24/25 he wrote a series of books on the philosophy of nature. Beginning with ideas for a philosophy of nature in 1797 and then the first outline for a theory of a philosophy of nature in 1799. THen in 1800 he wrote this text called "on the world soul a hypothesisis of higher physics for the explanation of the universal organism", which got goeths attention and goethe then told the university of yana to hire scelling who at that point an unpaid professor, and he was wildly popular becoming at 25 the most popualar philosopher in germany. Even in america, later, it took a while for word to travel but in the 30s he was all ther rage amongsts the american trancendentalists, they were translating his work and publishing it the dial and so on. 

So he really had this turn towards nature in the late 1790s and early 1800s where hes trying to say that nature is apriori as a dynamically evolving system, and human self consciousness is an elaboration upon a potency of potentiality that was always latent in nature. (schelling pre emerson in the 1830s question).

So then in the early 1800s he has a neoplatonian turn where he realises that he has a figdeean approach where everything spills out of the I, and then he has a natural philosophical approach where the I spills out of the natural world, and is like 'how do i coordinate the two', so hes realising there must be an indifference point or an absolute thats beyond subject and object, and these two approaches that hes elaborating beyond the subjective trancendental approach and the objective natuaral philosophy approach, are just two ways of coordinating our approach to the absolute and neither gets there fully. He tended to privilage the natural philosophy approach but was wanted this to be a coordinate way for getting at something beyond finite rational thought, because the absolute is the unthingable and so the unthinkable. And so he was working this out for a few years from 1806, Hagel finishes the phenemonology of spirit, gets the proof sent off to the printer just an napoleans army is invading vienna and the proofs suprvived, in which Hagel critisises schelling (or is percieved to have) by implying schelling and his followers think of the absolute as a night in which all cows are black. Meaning nothing can be distinguished and its just a soup. Schelling, was upset by this obviously, and in a letter to Hagel says 'can you specify that your not talking about me when you make that critisism' to which hagel responds 'i thought it was obvious that I was talking about some of your lesser lights amongst your followers, not you' - which makes sense because when schelling and hagel were coediting a journal together some years earlier, schelling uses the same metaphor, critically, to dismiss this where he says 'the absolute is NOT a night in which all cows are black' - so hagels borrowing schellings own metaphor so theres a littel confusion there in the recption of the history. Although Hagel wrote back to say of course I wasnt talking about you, their close friendship pretty much fades out at this point. 

Hagel became famous many years later, but from that point forward, shelling realised theres a major problem with this whole approach to the absolute in philosophy trying to develop the system which would alow us to relate everything to the absolute. And Hagel claims at the end of the phenemonology to have arrived at absolute knowledge, schelling was very uncomfortable with this but i think that he needed Hagel to articulate it in such brilliance, because schelling started to say at this point that the absolute, the godhead is not a system its a life, god is alive, god is freedom, **and our own freedom is a reflecion of that divine ground** and the idea that that freedom could be curtailed and neatly wrapped up in a system was horrendus from schellings point of view. And so its not that schelling gave up system, its that he said basically that each one of us needs to develop our own system, which may seem like a contradiction so schelling starting to refer to it as 'my system' and you need your system, so that it would feel coherent, internally consistent to you; because we all have unique once occurent perspective on this mystery. 

And later Charles Sanders Pierce, wrote in a letter to William James, about how much he admired schelling - because its not just that I need my own system, its that tomorrow I may need a newer system the one I had yesterday - so Schelling in Pirece's view, was a very scientific thinker because he was starting again, over and over again from new points of view, trying to develop a system, but never being attached to a particular system. SO Peirce really admired this and his evolutionary cosmology and panenthisiam, is inheriting some of schellings insights and updating the science, as whitehead would also do. 


